README.md, before:

# Pokemon Mod Suite

This suite provides tools for inspecting, modifying, and analysing data
files used in Pokémon games or related ROM/RAM-based assets. It includes
interactive SDL-based utilities, checksum helpers, and Python scripts
that automate data extraction, transformation, and patch generation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Installation

### Build (for UNIX)

``` sh
make
```

All tools require `SDL3` and `SDL3_ttf` to be installed on your system in order to compile (edit Makefile as necessary).

### Install

Install the binaries to `/usr/local/bin`:

``` sh
sudo make install
```

Install to a custom prefix:

``` sh
make install PREFIX=/opt/mytools
```

Install into a packaging root:

``` sh
make install DESTDIR=/tmp/pkgroot
```

### Uninstall

``` sh
sudo make uninstall
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Usage

### Hex Editor

Launch the hex editor:

``` sh
hex_editor <file>
```

### Checksum Calculator

Compute checksum for a file:

``` sh
checksum <file> <game>
```

### Bag Editor

Edit the bag in a save file:

``` sh
pokemon_bag <file> <game>
```

### Mirage Island Modifier

Edit Mirage Island bytes:

``` sh
mirageisland <file> <game>
```

You can use the `-h` flag with the programs to bring up an extensive usage message.

## How to use the Mirage Island modifier

Mirage Island is an elusive place that is governed by two bytes of memory in RAM (.sav file) that are generated fresh every day.
If the bytes do not match up (likely), you will see this when you go to the man in Pacifidlog Town:

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/no-mirage-island.png" alt="No Mirage Island">
</p>

First, you MUST save your game for today BEFORE using the program. The program relies on a newly generated Mirage Island seed.
By default, the program will save a new file with the suffix `_mirage`. You will then need to make sure this save file has the same name as your ROM. The `-o` flag will overwrite the current save file you have.

After running the program with a fresh save for the day, you should see this when you go to Pacifidlog Town:

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/yes-mirage-island.png" alt="Yes Mirage Island">
</p>

Enjoy the island!

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/mirage-island.png" alt="Mirage Island">
</p>


------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Python Scripts

Two Python utilities are included in the `src/scripts/` directory. These
scripts translate between byte arrays and specific game encodings for
Pokémon text data. They can be used via command line or through an
interactive GUI.

### Text Encoder/Decoder for Game Boy (Gen 1/2)

`text_to_bytes_gb.py` - Handles text encoding for Pokémon Red, Blue,
Yellow, Gold, Silver, and Crystal.

### Text Encoder/Decoder for GBA (Gen 3)

`text_to_bytes_gba.py` - Handles text encoding for Pokémon Ruby,
Sapphire, FireRed, LeafGreen, and Emerald.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GUI Mode

Both scripts launch a graphical interface by default when run without
arguments:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py
python text_to_bytes_gba.py
```

The GUI provides:

- **Region Selection**: Choose between English/Western or Japanese
  character sets
- **Game Selection**: Pick the specific game for accurate encoding
  tables
- **Text Field**: Enter human-readable text to encode
- **Bytes Field**: Enter hex bytes to decode (with or without spaces)
- **Encode Button**: Convert text → bytes
- **Decode Button**: Convert bytes → text
- **Load File Button**: Import text from a `.txt` file (newlines are
  automatically converted to the appropriate control code placeholder)
- **No Spaces Checkbox**: Output bytes without separating spaces

**Note**: The GUI requires PyQt6. If not installed, the script will
display an error message and print the CLI usage information.

``` sh
pip install PyQt6
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CLI Mode

Pass any argument to use command-line mode instead of the GUI.

#### Gen 1/2 (Game Boy)

Encode text to bytes:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py "Hello"
# Output: 87 A4 AB AB AC

python text_to_bytes_gb.py --gen 2 "Hello"
# Output: 87 A4 AB AB AC
```

Decode bytes to text:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py -r "87 A4 AB AB AC"
# Output: Hello
```

Use Japanese encoding:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py -j "Pokemon"
```

Encode from a file (newlines become `<0x55>` control codes):

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py -f input.txt
```

Output without spaces between bytes:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py -n "Hello"
# Output: 87A4ABABAC
```

#### Gen 3 (GBA)

Encode text to bytes:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py "Hello"
# Output: C2 D9 E0 E0 E3

python text_to_bytes_gba.py --ruby "Hello"
python text_to_bytes_gba.py --sapphire "Hello"
python text_to_bytes_gba.py --fr "Hello"
python text_to_bytes_gba.py --lg "Hello"
python text_to_bytes_gba.py --emerald "Hello"
```

Decode bytes to text:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py -r "C2 D9 E0 E0 E3"
# Output: Hello
```

Use Japanese encoding:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py -j --emerald "Pokemon"
```

Encode from a file (newlines become `<0xFE>` control codes):

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py -f input.txt
```

Output without spaces between bytes:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py -n "Hello"
# Output: C2D9E0E0E3
```

Commit message:

Added a pokemon party editor and Japanese text encoding for the hex editor

README.md, after:

# Pokemon Mod Suite

This suite provides tools for inspecting, modifying, and analysing data
files used in Pokémon games or related ROM/RAM-based assets. It includes
interactive SDL-based utilities, checksum helpers, and Python scripts
that automate data extraction, transformation, and patch generation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Installation

### Build (for UNIX)

``` sh
make
```

All tools require `SDL3` and `SDL3_ttf` to be installed on your system in order to compile (edit Makefile as necessary).

### Install

Install the binaries to `/usr/local/bin`:

``` sh
sudo make install
```

Install to a custom prefix:

``` sh
make install PREFIX=/opt/mytools
```

Install into a packaging root:

``` sh
make install DESTDIR=/tmp/pkgroot
```

### Uninstall

``` sh
sudo make uninstall
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Usage

### Hex Editor

Launch the hex editor:

``` sh
hex_editor <file>
```

### Checksum Calculator

Compute checksum for a file:

``` sh
checksum <file> <game>
```

### Bag Editor

Edit the bag in a save file:

``` sh
pokemon_bag <file> <game>
```

### Party Editor (only Gen 1 and 2 for now)

Edit the party in a save file:

``` sh
pokemon_party <file> <game>
```

### Mirage Island Modifier

Edit Mirage Island bytes:

``` sh
mirageisland <file> <game>
```

You can use the `-h` flag with the programs to bring up an extensive usage message.

## How to use the Mirage Island modifier

Mirage Island is an elusive place that is governed by two bytes of memory in RAM (.sav file) that are generated fresh every day.
If the bytes do not match up (likely), you will see this when you go to the man in Pacifidlog Town:

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/no-mirage-island.png" alt="No Mirage Island">
</p>

First, you MUST save your game for today BEFORE using the program. The program relies on a newly generated Mirage Island seed.
By default, the program will save a new file with the suffix `_mirage`. You will then need to make sure this save file has the same name as your ROM. The `-o` flag will overwrite the current save file you have.

After running the program with a fresh save for the day, you should see this when you go to Pacifidlog Town:

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/yes-mirage-island.png" alt="Yes Mirage Island">
</p>

Enjoy the island!

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/mirage-island.png" alt="Mirage Island">
</p>


------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Python Scripts

Two Python utilities are included in the `src/scripts/` directory. These
scripts translate between byte arrays and specific game encodings for
Pokémon text data. They can be used via command line or through an
interactive GUI.

### Text Encoder/Decoder for Game Boy (Gen 1/2)

`text_to_bytes_gb.py` - Handles text encoding for Pokémon Red, Blue,
Yellow, Gold, Silver, and Crystal.

### Text Encoder/Decoder for GBA (Gen 3)

`text_to_bytes_gba.py` - Handles text encoding for Pokémon Ruby,
Sapphire, FireRed, LeafGreen, and Emerald.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GUI Mode

Both scripts launch a graphical interface by default when run without
arguments:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py
python text_to_bytes_gba.py
```

The GUI provides:

- **Region Selection**: Choose between English/Western or Japanese
  character sets
- **Game Selection**: Pick the specific game for accurate encoding
  tables
- **Text Field**: Enter human-readable text to encode
- **Bytes Field**: Enter hex bytes to decode (with or without spaces)
- **Encode Button**: Convert text → bytes
- **Decode Button**: Convert bytes → text
- **Load File Button**: Import text from a `.txt` file (newlines are
  automatically converted to the appropriate control code placeholder)
- **No Spaces Checkbox**: Output bytes without separating spaces

**Note**: The GUI requires PyQt6. If not installed, the script will
display an error message and print the CLI usage information.

``` sh
pip install PyQt6
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CLI Mode

Pass any argument to use command-line mode instead of the GUI.

#### Gen 1/2 (Game Boy)

Encode text to bytes:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py "Hello"
# Output: 87 A4 AB AB AC

python text_to_bytes_gb.py --gen 2 "Hello"
# Output: 87 A4 AB AB AC
```

Decode bytes to text:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py -r "87 A4 AB AB AC"
# Output: Hello
```

Use Japanese encoding:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py -j "Pokemon"
```

Encode from a file (newlines become `<0x55>` control codes):

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py -f input.txt
```

Output without spaces between bytes:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gb.py -n "Hello"
# Output: 87A4ABABAC
```

#### Gen 3 (GBA)

Encode text to bytes:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py "Hello"
# Output: C2 D9 E0 E0 E3

python text_to_bytes_gba.py --ruby "Hello"
python text_to_bytes_gba.py --sapphire "Hello"
python text_to_bytes_gba.py --fr "Hello"
python text_to_bytes_gba.py --lg "Hello"
python text_to_bytes_gba.py --emerald "Hello"
```

Decode bytes to text:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py -r "C2 D9 E0 E0 E3"
# Output: Hello
```

Use Japanese encoding:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py -j --emerald "Pokemon"
```

Encode from a file (newlines become `<0xFE>` control codes):

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py -f input.txt
```

Output without spaces between bytes:

``` sh
python text_to_bytes_gba.py -n "Hello"
# Output: C2D9E0E0E3
```
